---
layout: layouts/thought
title: Do Androids Dream of Electric Sheep? by Philip K. Dick (1968)
desc: My thoughts on the book that inspired Blade Runner
date: 2019-01-10 00:00:00
tags:
  - book
  - review
---

Do Androids Dream Of Electric Sheep is a book written by Phillip Dick in 1968. It explores many themes from soviet union undertones to questions about empathy and what it means to be human.

I personally found the ending dissatisfying. Throughout the novel, the center of focus follows Rick Deckard, a rogue android bounty hunter. Towards the beginning of the novel, we see that he is unhappy with his life and his wife. It is evident he cares very much for living things as he takes genuine care of an electric sheep which replaced his living sheep. He then is tasked with taking down 8 nexus-6 android rogues.

I think the most insightful oment was when he connected with Luba Luft before she was killed. He realized that he did in fact feel empathy towards androids, and yet - after Rachel tricking him and then killing his goat, he still proceeds to kill the remaining 3 andys. I didn't understand why Rick's changw of heart in the middle of the novel was completely disregarded in the end. He also connected to Mercer, which I never understood and it bothered me. At the end of the novel, his wife becomes happy again and feels renewed love for him, but he feels guilt and regret.

What does it mean to be human? More specifically, what does it mean to be alive? Empathy? And what was John Isadore's role in this novel?
