---
title: Chickless Pot Pie
description: How to make chickless pot pie
date: 2022-04-18 18:29:00 -0700
tags:
  - dinner
  - vegetarian
  - vegan
prep: 10 min
cook: 1 hr
servings: 4
---

Chickless pot pie is the vegan/vegetarian alternative to chicken pot pie. This is a recipe that brings back a lot of childhood memories for me and the taste difference is indistinguishable.

## Ingredients
* 1 cup sliced carrots
* 1 cup frozen green peas
* 1 cup small diced potatoes
* 1/2 cup thinly sliced celery
* 1/3 cup chopped onion
* 1/2 cup olive oil
* 1/3 cup all-purpose flour (preferably unbleached)
* 1/2 tsp salt
* 1/4 tsp pepper
* 1/4 tsp garlic salt
* 1 3/4 cups vegetable broth
* 2/3 cup any kind of milk (preferably almond)
* 2 9in deep dish unbaked pie crusts

## Instructions
1. Preheat the oven to 425 Fahrenheit (218 Celsius). 
2. Combine the carrots, peas, potatoes and celery in a pan with a lid, fill it with water, and put it on medium heat covered with the lid. Wait until it boils and the vegetables are soft (around 15 min). Once soft, drain the vegetables a strainer and put them to the side.
3. In a large pan over medium heat, cook the onions in the oil until they are soft and translucent (around 5 min). Stir in the flour, salt, pepper, and garlic salt. Cook and stir for 2 minutes to get the flour taste out. Slowly stir in the vegetable broth and then add the milk. Once all ingredients are thoroughly mixed, reduce the heat and simmer until the mixture is slightly thicker. Remove from the heat and stir in the drained vegetables.
4. Roll out one of the unbaked crusts and place in a 9in deep pie pan. Pour the mixture into the bottom crust. 
5. Roll out the second pie crust and place it on top. Seal the edges of the pan with the crust and cut a few small slits into the top crust to allow steam to escape. I would also recommend getting a metal cookie sheet, covering it with a layer of aluminum foil, and placing this directly underneath the pie pan. When the pie cooks, this will prevent any filling from dripping out of the pan into the oven and burning (trust me, it's pretty hard to clean burnt oven remains).
6. Place the pie pan in the preheated oven and bake it until the pastry is golden brown and the filling is bubbly (30 to 35 min). Cool for 10 minutes before serving.
