---
title: Ube Ice Cream
description: How to make ube ice cream
date: 2022-02-05 10:45:00 -0800
tags:
  - dessert
  - vegetarian
prep: 1 hr
cook: 1.5 hrs
wait: 12 hrs
servings: 6
---

Ube ice cream is a perfect homemade dessert that simultaneously stays healthy and tastes delicious. It takes very little effort to produce and can last a very long time.

## Ingredients

* 2 medium-sized purple yams (or approximately 1 1/2 cups worth of yam)
* 3 eggs
* 2 cups heavy whipping cream
* 3/4 cup canned coconut milk
* 1/3 cup sugar
* 1/2 tsp vanilla extract

## Instructions

1. Briefly wash and boil purple yams in a lidded pot for 1 hour or until slighly soft. The skin should be soft enough to scrape off with a bit of help from a fork or spoon.
2. Take the yams out of the pot and use a fork or spoon to peel off the skin. Place the yam insides in a mixing bowl, mash thoroughly until fine, and place in the fridge to cool.
3. Separate the egg yolks from the eggs white of all the eggs and whisk the egg yolks in a separate ceramic bowl. We won't use the egg whites at all so they can be used for another meal.
4. In a pan over medium heat, combine the heavy whipping cream, coconut milk, and sugar. stir persistently until the sugar is completely dissolved.
5. Stir in about a cup of the hot mixture into the bowl containing the whisked eggs. Then pour all of it back into the saucepan.
6. Cook over medium to low heat until the mixture can coat a spoon in a slightly less watery fashion.
7. Remove from heat, then mix in the vanilla and yams. Make sure the yams are mixed extremely thoroughly or else the resulting ice cream will have yam chunks. It's ok to spend a long time mixing for this reason.
8. Transfer the mixture to a container and freeze for 12 hrs.



